- Start Date: 2017-01-14
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Ember Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

Introduce a `let` keyword to bind values to names within a handlebars
template.

Block form:

```handlebars
{{#let "Milk" "Cereal" as |one two|}}
  Breakfast:
  1. {{one}}
  2. {{two}}
{{/let}}
```

or inline:

```handlebars
{{let one="Milk" two="Cereal"}}

Breakfast:
1. {{one}}
2. {{two}}
```

# Motivation

The primary method for supplying named values to a template is via
properties on its backing scope (either a controller or a
component). These properties are specified in JavaScript which, while
as a mechanism is very well understood by the community, also comes
with several drawbacks.

The first is that it spreads the requisite knowledge to understanding
a template across two places. In other words, it is impossible to understand
what exactly it does without simultaneously holding both the `.hbs`
and `.js` files together and continuously merging them with your
mind. The lack of this overhead is one of the commonly cited strengths
of JSX over Handlebars.

Another is that computed properties are error-prone because of their
requirement to explicitly enumerate dependencies. If the computation
of a property has incorrectly specified dependent keys it will break
in mysterious ways that usually involve a sudden and hard-to-reproduce
lack of reactivity to changing inputs.

In order to avoid these pitfalls, developers have begun moving more
and more computation into templates, and the rise of popular of addons
like `ember-truth-helpers`, `ember-math-helpers` and
`ember-composable-helpers` are strong evidence of this pressure.

For example:

```hbs
<button disabled={{or isPending isError}}>Submit</button>
```

This solves the problem of proximity by placing the derivation of a
value right next to where it's used. There's no question about how the
disabled attribute is computed. It also solves the dependency problem
because the dependencies of an expression are implicity enumerated
merely through the act of expressing it.

While these are advantages that a large portion of the community finds
empowering, they do not come without drawbacks.

If an expression becomes sufficiently complex, then it actually begins
to _reduce_ clarity rather than improve it; especially when you end
up using it more than once.

Consider:

``` handlebars
Welcome back {{concat (capitalize person.firstName) ' ' (capitalize person.lastName)}}

Account Details:
First Name: {{capitalize person.firstName}}
last Name: {{capitalize person.lastName}}
```

The moment you need to re-use values, or compose them from
constituent values that are themselves re-used, you need to
unroll the whole thing and move towards composition via computed properties.

The `let` helper relieves this pressure by allowing you to bind the
value of computation to a name so that it can be used to derive
subsequent values. It _preserves the advantages of proximity and
dependency management, while retaining the re-use and composability
of computed properties_.

With `let`, the above example can be re-written as:

``` handlebars
{{let firstName=(capitalize person.firstName) lastName=(capitalize person.lastName)}}

Welcome back {{concat firstName ' ' lastName}}

Account Details:
First Name: {{firstName}}
last Name: {{lastName}}
```

By allowing you to bind a computation to a name, the `let` helper lets
you define computed properties right within your template.


# Detailed design

The `let` keyword is implemented as a block helper that takes
its positional parameters and yields them on to passed block. In this
way, it is very similar to the `with` keyword (in fact, the original
implementation was cribbed from there). The only difference is that
`let` will _always_ render its block. Whereas `with` will _not_
render if it is passed an empty list, `null`, `undefined`, `false`, or
an empty string, `let` binds all values equitably.

```handlebars
{{#with (array) as |list|}}
  {{!does not render}}
  You'll never see me!
{{/with}}
```

```handlebars
{{#let (array) as |list|}}
  Hello there!
{{/let}}
```

An inline form is also supported via a syntax transform, so


``` handlebars
{{let a=1 b=2}}
a + b = {{sum a b}}
```

expands to

``` handlebars
{{#let 1 2 as |a b|}}
  a + b = {{sum a b}}
{{/let}}
```

Like `let` in JavaScript and most functional languages, bindings can be
"temporarily" overriden within a scope, and then "restored" once they
pass out of scope:

```handlebars
{{let a=1 b=2}}
a + b = {{sum a b}} <!-- 3 -->
<div>
  {{let a=5}}
  a + b = {{sum a b}} <!-- 7 -->
</div>
a + b = {{sum a b}} <!-- 3 -->
```

Since this expands to (approximately):

``` handlebars
{{#let 1 2 as |a b|}}
  a + b = {{sum a b}} <!-- 3 -->
  <div>
    {{#let 5 as |a|}}
      a + b = {{sum a b}} <!-- 7 -->
    {{/let}}
  </div>
  a + b = {{sum a b}} <!-- 3 -->
{{/let}}
```

For a reference implementation. See https://github.com/thefrontside/ember-let

# How We Teach This

`let` is an extraordinarily common concept for programmers of all
stripes, and so while it is new to Ember templates, it still enjoys the
familiarity only 60 years of ubiquity can bring. It makes sense to
lean on that shared understanding to introduce it to the Ember
community. It's about _binding a name to value_ full stop.

At the same time, Embereños are familiar with computed properties, and
in many cases you could use a `let` expression instead of a computed
property. In other words, `let` performs a very similar function to a
computed property: it assigns a referencable name to a value that is
purely derived from other values.

Anywhere in the guides that uses `with` would be a
candidate for using `let` instead, but it would also be helpful to
have a section on "when to use computed properties" and "when to use
let" since `let` is not a silver bullet. An audit of all the examples
contained in the guides with an eye to how they might be improved via
the use of `let` or confirmed as much better using CPs would serve to
mark and understand these use cases.

# Drawbacks

This knocks down some barriers that today keep people from declaring more
computation in their templates. While there are stronger guarantees of
purity with computations performed in handlebars, it _does_ introduce a
fundamental question that developers will need to ask themselves when
specifying each computation: "should I put this in a template or
should I put it in my controller / component?" That overhead as
deveolpers attempt to figure out where that line is drawn could be
cumbersome.

Another potential drawback is that computations declared in Handlebars
cannot be shared back to JavaScript except via an action. We might
find computations duplicated in templates that really could be avoided
by having a strong shared model with computed properties.

# Alternatives

Doing nothing is certainly one approach. `with` is _almost_ `let`, and
in most cases works just well enough, but the caveats it contains make
it discouraging of the use-cases that `let` unlocks.

However, `let` sits on the cricital path of Ember growing its capability in
the area of FP so that it can be a worthy competitor in tomorrow's
world with the likes of Elm and friends.

# Unresolved questions

As proposed, `let` bindings happen in _parallel_, which is to say,
binding expressions within a `let` expression are invisible to each
other:

``` handlebars
{{let a=1 b=(sum a 5)}} <!-- `a` is not visible yet!!! -->

```

Many lanugages have a `let*` form which binds values in _sequence_
which can be nice if you have lots of dependent derived values:

``` handlebars
{{let* a=1 b=(sum a 5)}} <!-- `b`'s binding expression sees `a` -->
b: {{b}} <!-- 6 -->
```

Many languages also have a function similar to Ember's `with` called
`if-let` which only binds and evaluates its body if its test is
truthy. Something to consider is deprecating `with` in favor of
`if-let` to align Ember with wider programming practice and re-enforce
what `with` is actually doing.

``` handlebars
{{#if-let someValue as |value|}}
  Hallo!
{{/if-let}}

<button onclick={{action (mut someValue) true}}>
  Now you see me
</button>

<button onclick={{action (mut someValue) false}}>
  Now you don't
</button>
```
