---
stage: ready-for-release
start-date: 2023-03-06T14:09:00.000Z
release-date:
release-versions:
teams:
  - cli
  - learning
prs:
  accepted: 'https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/907'
project-link:
suite:
---

<!--- 
Directions for above: 

stage: Leave as is
start-date: Fill in with today's date, 2032-12-01T00:00:00.000Z
release-date: Leave as is
release-versions: Leave as is
teams: Include only the [team(s)](README.md#relevant-teams) for which this RFC applies
prs:
  accepted: Fill this in with the URL for the Proposal RFC PR
project-link: Leave as is
suite: Leave as is
-->

# `pnpm` support

## Summary

Enable Ember CLI users to opt into using `pnpm` for package management.

## Motivation

[`pnpm`](https://pnpm.io/) is a popular alternative to both `npm` and `yarn` that prioritizes correctness, especially for `peerDependencies` and monorepos. 

`pnpm` has very active maintainance, support, and financial funding.
Their [website](https://pnpm.io/) states that `pnpm` is:
 - Fast: `pnpm` is up to 2x faster than the alternatives 
 - Efficient: Files inside `node_modules` are cloned or hard linked from a single content-addressable storage 
 - Supports monorepos: `pnpm` has built-in support for multiple packages in a repository
 - Strict: `pnpm` creates a non-flat `node_modules` by default, so code has no access to arbitrary packages.

For folks with lots of projects on their computers, `pnpm` is _extremely_ space-efficient.
Where `npm` and `yarn` would duplicate `node_modules` per-project, `pnpm` will only download a package (at a specific version) once across your whole machine.

Additionally, `npm` and `yarn` repeatedly have demonstrated that their strategies with `peerDependencies` are not correct, and it is vitally important we use and support a tool that can guide folks towards correctly creating addons. For example, `@embroider/macros` relies on node's resolution algorithm, so having `peerDependencies` resolved correctly is important for `dependencySatisfies` to work as expected in monorepos. 

Ember CLI currently only supports `npm` (default) and `yarn` for project initialization as well as various commands. At present, projects work with `pnpm`, but the tooling is unaware.



## Detailed design

Enabling `pnpm` is designed as opt-in to prevent disruptions to developer's current workflow, much the same as `yarn`.

There are a few integration points that we must support for `pnpm` (and any package manager):
 - `ember install`
 - `ember init`, `ember new`, `ember addon`
 - `ember try:one`, `ember try:each`
 - generated C.I. configs
 - Documenation

### `ember install`

There are two mechanisms through which to opt-in.
The first one is the presence of a `pnpm-lock.yaml` file in the project root.

The `pnpm-lock.yaml` file is generated by `pnpm` when you run `pnpm install` (or the shorter `pnpm i`),
so we assume that its presence means the developer intends to use `pnpm` to manage their dependencies.

Alternatively you, you can force Ember CLI to use `pnpm` with the `--pnpm` flag, and symmetrically,
you can force Ember CLI to not use `pnpm` with the `--no-pnpm` flag.

To recap:

- `ember install ember-resources` with `pnpm-lock.yaml` present will use `pnpm`
- `ember install ember-resources` without `pnpm-lock.yaml` present will use npm
- `ember install ember-resources --pnpm` will use `pnpm`
- `ember install ember-resources --no-pnpm` will use npm

### `ember init`, `ember new`, `ember addon`

Since this triad of commands is generally ran before a project is set up, there is no `pnpm-lock.yaml` file presence to check.
This means we are left with the `--pnpm`/`--no-pnpm` pair of flags, that will also be added to these commands:

- `ember new my-app` will use npm
- `ember new my-app --pnpm` will use `pnpm`

The above also applies to `ember addon` and `ember init`, noting that `ember init` doesn't receive any arguments.

#### `--skip-npm`

The `--skip-npm` flag _actually means_ "skip installation of dependencies" when using `ember addon` and `ember new`, 
including skipping installation with both `npm` and `yarn`. 
This will need to be extended to also skip installation of dependencies when `pnpm` is used.

For example:
```bash
ember new my-app --pnpm --skip-npm
```


### `ember try:one`, `ember try:each`

At the time of writing this RFC, `ember-try` already supports `pnpm`, but it is undocumented in [the README](https://github.com/ember-cli/ember-try).
Documentation will need to be added to the README, 
as well as the relevant `ember-cli` blueprints will need to correctly configure `usePnpm: true` in the `ember-try.js` config file when the `pnpm` flag is present.


### generated C.I. configs

At the time of writing this RFC, `ember-cli` supports two C.I. environments: Travis and GitHub Actions. 

Both the `.travis.yml` and `.github/workflows/ci.yml` config files for relevant blueprints will need to support the `pnpm` option such that C.I. passes on new projects using `pnpm`.

### for addons

Addons should be stricter than  defaults, so that they are good stewards of the ecosystem and don't leak accidental uncertainty to their consumers.

In addon projects, the `.npmrc` will need the following defaults:
```
# all peer dependencies must be declared or forwarded to the consumer
auto-install-peers=false

# we want true isolation in addons -- if a dependency is not declared, we want an error
reslove-peers-from-workspace-root=false
```

### Documentation

These pages presently mention `npm` / `yarn` and will need to be updated to include `pnpm` 
 - https://cli.emberjs.com/release/basic-use/assets-and-dependencies/
 - https://guides.emberjs.com/release/addons-and-dependencies/

## How we teach this

The Ember Guides should be updated to reflect the new flags, where applicable,
as well as the new behavior of `ember install` in the presence of a `pnpm-lock.yaml` -- though most of the guides use `ember` as the CLI tool for managing packages. 

We may want to consider updating the [tutorial](https://guides.emberjs.com/release/tutorial/part-1/orientation/) (and its automation) to use `pnpm`, as `npm` is very slow.


In addition, the built-in instructions for `ember help` should be updated to reflect the new flags.


## Drawbacks

- `pnpm` is very strict about peers and what dependencies are allowed in a project and will error if a project's package.json is incorrect for a given scenario. `pnpm` is very clear about these errors and what to do for action items, but it means that we'll need to make sure that `pnpm` is tested in `ember-cli` when generating new projects so that we can be certain that folks' "first time experience" is smooth
- There may be other package managers in the future, but we cannot see the future. There have been talks about making ember-cli somehow generically handle package-managers, but it is unknown how that would work, and is unneeded for now.


## Alternatives

- Figure out a way to generically handle any package manager 
- Continue with the partial pnpm support we have today

## Unresolved questions

- Are there any other references in the guides to `npm` or `yarn`?
  The only place I could find that _mentioned_ `yarn` is here: https://guides.emberjs.com/release/addons-and-dependencies/
- Is there a `--package-manager` flag / option in `ember-cli`? for blueprint authors, that may be useful.
- Should `--skip-npm` be aliased to `--skip-install`?


